We don't change. We don't choose to change, but we sure are changed. And we have to make use
of our knowledge about how that change comes about, because if we don't think the change happens,
we're totally screwed. It is an honor to introduce my next guest, Professor Robert Sapulski,
who at Stanford University is a professor of biology, neurology, and neurosurgery,
as well as a research associate at the Institute of Primary Research at the National Museum of Kenya.
Over the past 30 years, Professor Sapulski has divided his time between the lab,
where he studies how stress hormones can damage the brain, as well as in East Africa,
where he studies the impact of chronic stress on the health of baboons.
Robert is the author of numerous books, of which I have all of them, including his new book
out in October called Determined, A Science of Life Without Free Will. This was a wide-ranging,
intense, and challenging conversation, one of my favorite ever. Robert has had a big influence
on my thinking these last 20 years, and it was a real treat to talk to him in person,
even though when I scheduled the interview, I didn't know his next book was on free will.
I'm still making my mind up on what I think on this topic, but this guy has been working on
this for 40 years, and this is an amazing conversation with insight into the constraints
that biology poses for the great simplification. Please welcome Professor Robert Sapulski.
Professor Sapulski, welcome to the program.
Well, thanks for having me here.
I know you well enough to call you Robert, but I've learned so much from you over the last
couple decades that I feel Professor Sapulski is more appropriate.
Well, all that does is make me feel elderly and having a large prostate, so Robert's just fine.
Okay, Robert, it is. You have a new book coming out called Determined, A Science of Life Without
Free Will, and we're going to get to that, but it is very hard for me as someone who has all of
your books, has watched almost all of your online biology lectures to pass over your decades of
scholarship on the human brain and behavior that's relevant to the subject of this podcast,
which is the great simplification. I know you watched my movie earlier, so let's start with
this, though. How and when did you first realize that you wanted to be a biologist and study animals
and behavior? I was about eight years old when I decided I wanted to be a primatologist,
go study primates in the wild. I've run across a lot of field work people over the years,
not surprisingly, and about two-thirds of them grew up someplace exotic.
Their parents were field researchers or missionaries or some governmental NGO thing in some exotic
place, and then the remaining third would be people who grew up in some god-awful urban,
I'm trying not to use hellhole, but in some ways, yes, and then at some point they stumbled into
the Natural History Museum and imprinted on something, and that was my version of it,
the American Museum of Natural History, and in retrospect, I probably could just as easily have
imprinted on geckos or horseshoe crabs if I had taken a left or instead of a right in the hallway,
but I wound up in the primate exhibit and that's it. I decided I wanted to go live with
primates, non-human ones, forever after. You wrote a primate's memoir and why zebras don't
get ulcers, but recently for a long time you've been at Stanford. When's the last time you've
been to Africa and do you miss that type of work? Let's see, the rhythm I maintained was
nine months a year in a laboratory being a neurobiologist with a lab coat, and during the
summer's three months a year back out in a tent with baboons in the Serengeti, I managed to keep
that going for 33 summers until 13, 12 years ago when things just fell apart there on a whole
bunch of fronts and it was time to pack it in and decide 33 was pretty damn lucky. Yeah, I miss it.
Yeah, I've been to Africa four times, including Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi, Botswana, Zambia, and I
was enthralled every single time and I wish I could have in a different lifetime
done something like you did. So we are getting into the brain and behavior. Humanity and the
biosphere are facing multiple interconnected challenges. In my own writing and speaking,
I point out and have for 20 years that we don't so much have an environmental problem
or an economic problem, but rather that most of our challenges emanate from a mismatch of the human
brain, modern human brain from our ancestral environment. What do you think about that broadly?
I love your emphasis on that and your work. I mean, it's a obligatory cliche in my field to
like once every 10 minutes start a sentence by saying, well, realizing that for 99% of human
history was spent in small hunter-gatherer bands, it's a total cliche because it's true and it's
incredibly important. Not only are microwaves like a relatively recent invention that don't
particularly fit with our evolutionary past, but agriculture isn't either. Living in sedentary,
settled communities isn't either. All of that is in a blink of an eye. The notion that culture
evolves faster than brains do is at the core exactly of a huge amount of what ails humans.
So historically, culturally, it's been common to think of our emotions, our psyche,
and human personalities as completely separate from the body and physiology. Back 30, 40 years ago,
there was the standard social science model, but a lot of emerging work in the past decades,
including yours, has suggested that that's not true and that these two things are in fact deeply
intertwined. Where did this separation come about in the first place?
Well, you know, everybody has to pull out Descartes at this point who was going on about how
animals are machines and humans have souls and that sort of set up the basic dichotomy
that people have run with ever since between humans and other species or between the brain and the
body or between the brain and the mind. And what everybody's very fond of saying now is Descartes
was totally wrong, which is animals have emotions and empathy and all of that also.
My take is Descartes was totally wrong because, yeah, animals are biological machines and so
are we. We're just really much more complicated versions, but we're built out of the same stuff.
And where the mismatches become most interesting is when we're working with the exact same blueprint
and the brain and the hormones, all of that of any other species out that were just like them,
that were just like them. And then we go use it in a way that like no orangutan could ever dream of.
And there you have the mismatch.
It's so bizarre having a conversation with you. I just realized something as you were speaking
that in reading your latest book determined when I'm reading, your voice is in my head
reading the words like your voice and your diction. And I didn't realize it till just now,
but it's interesting because I've listened to so many of your lectures. I wonder if that's true
for a lot of people. So building on your point in our culture, in our polarized social media
addicted soundbite culture on the conservative side, a lot of humans don't actually believe in
evolution. And on the more liberal side, anything that is explained as having biological origins
or biological explanations can now get you canceled. What do you think about that? And
will it ever be possible for a plurality or a majority of society to have a broad
understanding of the biological origins of human behaviors?
Well, just to be pessimistic, I think there's always going to be a divide. And it's often going
to be able to be framed in terms of a conservative versus a progressive orientation or a made excited
by novelty versus made anxious by novelty sort of dichotomy. Amid that though, there's like
interesting stuff like a standard progressive stance is to have apoplexy when people start
talking about biological roots, genetic roots, genetic inevitability of something like intelligence.
And obviously, all sorts of right wing ideologues have run with the pseudoscience of like genetic
determinism of IQ, things like that. So that's exactly the dichotomy you've set up there. On the
other hand, when it comes to sexual orientation, the left has been pioneering in the notion that
like being gay is not a choice, let alone a choice that soils your extensive soul or whatever.
It's a biological trait on a continuum. While in this case, it's the right that says there's no
biology there at all. So it's a little bit a function of what the topic is. But all of that is
within, yes, indeed, this very narrow edge that one has to walk on these days between
being canceled and going in a left position that places a humane ideology way above scientific
facts now and then, and then all the folks who want to burn science textbooks.
So do you find it teaching at one of the premier universities in the world
more difficult today than it was 10 or 15 years ago to discuss the biological origins of many
human behaviors? Yes, maybe a little bit. Every other year, I teach this big class. It's been
getting like five, 600 students per round in sort of the last decade or so about the biological
roots of human behavior, human social behavior. And I always say for the next to last lecture,
one of the biological roots of religiosity. And like I realized after a while that I didn't record
it because it came back and bit me in the rear in some ways. And inevitably, you know, my theme
and it was, you know, religious belief or the lack of capacity for religious belief or biological
phenomena, just like anything else. And they're interesting to analyze and they've got all sorts
of unexpected twists and it's complicated as hell or all that. But we're biological organisms.
And inevitably, there's always some religious students who are offended. Very nicely inevitably,
there's always some religious students who instead have an epiphany. And usually earlier in the
quarter come to me and say, oh, my God, I'm like kind of having a crisis here. And I say, me too,
that's what that's what I had as well. At least they're not hostile. No one's condemning me to
Hades. What I've noticed is the pattern instead is a few weeks later when they graduate, they
leave me a little gift, which is always like a little pocket Bible saying, please, please,
please read this. I'm really concerned for you. So if that's my version of getting in trouble,
that's okay by me. It's education at this level is kind of like selling insurance. You have to
make 100 calls to get 10 meetings to have one sale and changing minds about the state of the
world is difficult. On that note, I also taught for nine years a class called Reality 101. I'm
just curious, you've been teaching what 40 years now almost, do you have people from your classes
20, 30 years ago that reach out to you and say this was a foundational epiphany for me and it
changed my life and my worldview? I imagine you do. You know, I'd love to hear that every day,
but more than more often than I've had any reasonable expectation of that sort. But
yeah, and it's it's very pleasurable. It's nice. It's nice to see my ex students who are like
chairs of psychiatry or this or that at med school. It's like even more nice to see
someone who's using a biological model now in the social work they've been doing for the last 25
years. I've got two ex students who are senators now and one of them I take complete credit for
and the other I run from in a panic. So that counts as a net zero there and I won't use names, but
you know, education is kind of a cool thing. My father was a professor architectural history
in New York City and at his death sort of we went through the number crunching to figure out
14% of New York City's licensed architects had been in a class of his at some point
and that felt really damn good to see. So that's cultural evolution?
Yeah. And in a very exciting way, you know, students have learned all sorts of stuff about
stress hormones from me. I've learned all sorts of interesting vocalizations from baboons.
Yeah, culture rolls along and it involves acquiring new behavioral characteristics.
So let's get into this. This is a difficult interview for me to have because if we weren't
time or energy constrained, it would probably go on for five or six hours because there's
so much to cover in your work that's relevant to the coming decades of humanity. So let's do
just a real quick flash round on three hormones that seem prominent in your research on the brain
and behavior. Dopamine, serotonin, sorry, well, you could include serotonin, dopamine,
testosterone and oxytocin. So could you briefly maybe tell a little story about what are the
common misconceptions of these neurotransmitter slash hormones and what roles do they actually
play in shaping our behavior?
Great. And you're absolutely right to say the slash because it used to be testosterone
only belong to the endocrinologists, but then it's due in something neurotransmitter is in the
brain and dopamine used to only belong to the neurocanus. So yeah, it's on a continuum, of course.
Testosterone, everybody knows exactly what testosterone is about, which is the hormone
that makes you aggressive. It explains why males the world over in species after species are such
pains in the asses because testosterone causes aggression. Testosterone does not cause aggression.
What testosterone does mostly is it amplifies, it increases the volume
on the aggression that's already there, the aggression that's been socially learned.
And that's a very different story. A perfect example of it, you take five male monkeys,
they've formed a dominance hierarchy, number one, trashes two through five, two trashes three
through five, all of that. So you take number three in the hierarchy and shoot them up with
testosterone, shoot them up with like so much of it, like he's growing out or something.
And does he get in more fights? Absolutely. Whoa, testosterone causes aggression.
But what you might speculate at that point is as a result of that testosterone,
number three is suddenly like confronting numbers two and one and maybe toppling the
nah, you never see that. He still is just as brown nosing with them as he used to be.
All that happens is he's become a total nightmare to numbers four and five.
All the testosterone has done is amplify the social learning that was there already.
One and two, you have to pretend you like they're like haircuts. Four and five, you can do anything
you want to. So let's do it 10 times as much as normal. Testosterone doesn't cause aggression.
Testosterone amplifies what's already been socially learned. And testosterone even more so
is about defending challenges to your status. But then humans have come up all sorts of
circumstances where defending your status does not involve aggression. Just look at a bunch of
rich half-drunk people at a charity auction and they're competing for status over who could
give away the most money conspicuously. That one doesn't make a whole lot of sense when
testosterone is all about aggression. And in studies where people get status by being more
generous, you give people testosterone and they become more generous. It's not about making you
aggressive. It's a making about amplifying whatever you've learned is good for holding on to status
in your little sliver of the universe. That's fascinating. I didn't know that. And how we get
status in our culture is probably going to have to change away from conspicuous consumption,
et cetera. So testosterone will play a role. Exactly. And I mean, what that tells us at the
end of the day with like human aggression, testosterone isn't the problem. The problem
is that we hand out so damn much social status for aggression. That's the thing that needs to be
solved. And as you know, that's immediately intertwined with who's got how many toys and how
conspicuously can you display it, et cetera, et cetera. We may not be economically rational,
but we are economically competitive and testosterone just feeds into that in ways no other
ape can make sense of. And what about dopamine? Dopamine, totally great, exciting neurotransmitter.
Another one where everybody knows what dopamine is about, which is dopamine is about reward.
It's about pleasure. Cocaine works on the dopamine system, various euphorians. You like give somebody
cocaine and they're releasing a thousandfold more dopamine than like some key parts of the
brain ever do. And whoa, it's amazing. Dopamine is about reward. It's about pleasure. And
superficially, it seems that way. You take a person or a monkey or a rat and you give them a
reward from completely out of nowhere and they have a rush of dopamine. Yeah, that's great.
Then you look more closely. And what you do is you take a paradigm and it works this way in a
human or a monkey or a rat. You like train the individual that, okay, we put you in a room and
as soon as the little light comes on, it means every time you press this lever 10 times, you're
going to get a little reward. Signal work reward, signal work reward. So the organism learns that
the college freshman in psych 101 or the lab or whatever, and they learn this. So you put them
in the situation, the light comes on, they do the work and they get the reward. When did dopamine
rise? And if dopamine is just about reward, it rises after you get the reward. That's not what
you see. It rises when the little light comes on. What's that about? That's you sitting there saying,
yeah, I'm all over this. I know about this lever pressing stuff. This is going to be great. I'm
like completely master of the universe at this lever pressing. Dopamine isn't about reward as
much as it's about the anticipation of reward. And we sure know endless ways in life in which the
anticipation turned out to be better than the actual thing. And most importantly, if you block
dopamine from being released at that time, you don't get the lever pressing. It's about the
anticipation and it's about the motivation and the goal directed behavior that's generated by that
anticipation. And our entire economic system is turning billions of barrels of ancient sunlight
into micro leaders of dopamine in anticipating what is better than the actual result of consuming
all these non-renewable natural resources. So it really is at part of the core of our current
superorganism, energy, hungry dynamic of human society.
Absolutely. And a weird human specific feature of the dopamine system
explains, you know, if you want to be grandiose, 99% of what's going wrong with this, which is
like you're a baboon. What are your sources of pleasure in life? You get to hassle somebody
lower ranking than you. You get to have sex. You're hungry and you eat something good. That's
about it. Like if you're human, all of those things feel good, but also like solving
Fermat's last theorem feels good. And like reading about, you know, acts of random kindness on the
and seeing an arousing scene in a movie involving characters who aren't even real and listening
to a symphony and smelling a flower in early and spring to all of that. We've got a system
that has to incorporate responding to rewarding things that range from like remembering a line
of poetry to quadruple orgasms. And the only way you can get a dopamine system that could handle
that large of a range is it's got to reset quickly. It's got to habituate quickly. It's
got to be able to go from okay, we're now going from the good to bad poetry range. We're now going
to the good or bad outcome of a billion dollar lottery and my one ticket range. It's got to
reset frequently. And there's some totally cool research showing some weirdo wiring things about
the human dopamine system that's very unique that probably explains the rapid resetting.
So that's great, but it sets you off for exactly the problem you've spent all your time thinking
about, which is if the dopamine system quickly resets by definition, whatever was an amazing
reward that came out from nowhere yesterday is going to be what you feel like you're entitled to
today and is going to feel insufficient tomorrow. And that's your whole world of like what has gone
wrong. We inevitably habituate to unexpected good stuff. And before you know it, not only is it like
the norm, it's not enough anymore. We get hungry again. Can that can that be trained? I don't
know you very well. So I don't know your own social media and internet habits. But being a
professor of neuroscience and being a dopamine expert, have you created a firewall in your own
behaviors so that your dopamine can, you know, your superhighway can reset to normal things
like flowers in the spring or playing with your dog or going for a walk in the forest?
Or what do you do about that? Well, I try a little bit of a Luddite. So I think I'm protected from
an awful lot of that pumbling. And I think it's sufficiently large and upper generations away
from where the culture is at that like not only don't I know how to access that stuff, but it
probably isn't going to do dopamine things to me that it does for 18 year olds. But in retrospect,
in some ways, that's what spending three months a year alone in a tent in the Serengeti would do.
The nearest electric outlet was like 90 miles away. Mail would be dropped off once every two weeks.
We got water from a river. There was no electricity, all of that. And, you know,
you do that and, you know, baboons are interesting. But I think what kept me spending
now 50% of my life going there back and forth is like at the end of the day,
you are so damn tired from the physical work and from the bright sun and from the cool things that
you saw. And whatever rice and beans you're eating for dinner, you cannot believe how good it tastes.
And it's hot as hell midday, but there was a breeze and you're like euphoric. That's the resetting.
And of course, what I would find is, you know, back in this world, that would have wonderfully
protective residual effects for about six and a half days. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting.
I'm trying to do this Silent Saturdays thing now, just because as the podcast gets more popular,
I have so many emails and social media and stuff and it's becoming becoming a little much. So I'm
trying to ratchet down my baseline a little bit and just do mundane things on Saturday
with limited success so far, because I don't have free will, but we're going to get to that.
So and oxytocin, what about oxytocin? Okay, oxytocin, it's the grooviest hormone on earth.
Oxytocin is about love and trust and social intelligence and all of that. Oxytocin is
this amazing hormone, best evidence is it's about 100 million years old. And what it first evolved
for was like the most basic thing that mammals were getting around to doing, which was making
mothers get attached to their kids and kids attached to their mothers, which is really essential
if you're going to do that mammal dependent on mom stuff. So that's been around for about 100
million years. Best evidence is about 30, 20 million years ago, it then got, you know,
refigured and started being used as well for pair bonding, you know, monogamy. And it's just a
tiny percentage of social mammals that are monogamous, but they make heavy use of oxytocin.
And whether we are one of those species is a really interesting topic in and of itself because
we're not, but we're kind of a little bit and we're very confused. And then I don't know,
maybe in the last five million years, oxytocin then got reconfigured again for things like
trust and social cooperation and generosity and game theory settings and all that.
Here's the naughtiest thing we've done with oxytocin, this 100 million year old hormone.
And in the last 20,000 years, we've reconfigured it again so that we secrete it and our dogs
secrete it when we're looking into each other's eyes. Like, whoa, we're now using oxytocin for
feeling attached to our ex wolves, like 20,000 years, a blink of an eye and now we use it for that
and you give a dog oxytocin and it looks at its human longer. Okay, so everything about oxytocin
there is great. And if we could just dump oxytocin in the water supply, this would be a wonderful
planet. Oxytocin promotes prosociality, it doesn't. Oxytocin promotes prosociality with people who
you consider to be an us, people like me. And your pet dog who you spend more on for food each
year than your Sudanese gets in a decade counts as an us. What does oxytocin do when you're
encountering thems? It makes you crappier to them. It makes you more preemptively aggressive.
It makes you less trustworthy. Oxytocin doesn't make you nice. It makes you nice to people who
already count as a you and it makes you awful to them. It just takes this us them like fracture
line we have in our heads and it just pushes it apart further. And amazing studies showing you
give people oxytocin and they become more cooperative to their team members and they
become awful to the people on the other team. It is not this groovy hormone. It is this hormone
that makes parochial, you know, provinciality more dramatic and that's not often a good thing.
It's just so obvious to me how critical biology and where these neurotransmitters originated
and why and what they're doing to our behaviors and our culture are so relevant to what we face.
What do you know about how oxytocin or anything else can change
the dynamic or who is us and who is them? How does that change?
Well, what it's really ideal for is what a lot of these hormones that expect
affect social behavior are good for. Yeah, you get someone who's super aggressive and testosterone
makes them more aggressive. You get someone who's incredibly altruistic and prosocial and oxytocin
probably makes them more so. Who you want to get are the folks in the middle when they're looking
at an ambiguous stimulus. Is this face angry, threatening or what? And most people would say
looks neutral to me and give someone testosterone and they now perceive it as being threatening.
Take a neutral face and give somebody oxytocin and they're now more likely to look at as friendly
or trustworthy. Where these hormones do their most modulatory things is the gray zone where what
you're perceiving really is much more in the eye of the beholder than the external realities of your
perceptions. It's really good at influencing interpretations in the gray zone. And that's
once again, it doesn't really require a hormone to have hated Nazis even more than you hated them
before. But depending on which politician is spouting which stuff, a hormone that turns a
neutral ambiguous signal into a strongly felt one for good or bad, that's where you really
see the interesting consequences. It's so fascinating. So I want to get to your new book.
But one of my staff members is a fan of your work and she wanted me to ask something related to
one of your books, why zebras don't get ulcers, you talked about stress. And for an individual
making a decision now, the effects of stress in the last few months of their life will, if I
understand it correctly, shrink the prefrontal cortex and enlarge the amygdala affecting whatever
decision that that individual will make. So following the logic of the great simplification
that we're approaching the peak of the carbon pulse and we're going to have less energy to power
society, if individuals who are barely having their basic needs met stressed out in terms of
survival, are those individuals less likely then to be pro-social and more prone towards
violence and effect in a society with less access to resources and lower standard of living?
Does that itself change the brains of its citizens immersed in that, causing
a negative feedbacks and less trust, etc? Yep, absolutely. And in all the bad ways,
you especially, you might imagine, it's not just in the previous few months, it's already,
you look at this, this is one of these findings where you should be up and screaming at how the
world works this way. You use some totally fancy brain imaging techniques that you could use on a
fetus. And by a third trimester fetus, their mother's socioeconomic status is already affecting
their brain development by way of the mother's stress hormones. So it was not just in the last
few months, it's starting from when you were still like mostly being fed by mom's blood and her
stress hormones. So in that regard, it's an entire lifetime worth of good or bad luck that is sculpting
your brain into a more reactive this or a sluggish that and all of that absolutely plays out.
In terms of your specific question of a world of more and more deprivation,
hunger, fear, stress, uncertainty, all of that, temperature, ambient temperature. In cities,
the ambient temperature on a particular day is a statistically significant predictor of levels
of violence. As this planet gets hotter, cities are going to be more violent. You look at people,
not where they live now, but where they grew up. And you look at people who grew up in cities versus
rural areas and their structural differences in their brain on the average. Whoa, is this
pertinent to our everyday lives? Absolutely. And I think we're three and a half years into seeing
one of the most tragic versions of it, which is for about a week or so into COVID. Everyone said,
wow, we're all in this together. And that lasted about a week. And all it has done is polarized
people and bring out the worst in an awful lot of people while bringing out the best in some people,
but exaggerating us them contrasts and making empathy totally tunnel visioned. And
that's been awful seeing that for the last three and a half years. And just to be really pessimistic,
oh my God, there's this new virus that suddenly is the most important thing in the world.
We blew it with our response to that. That's a pretty unappealing trial run for what the
equivalent's going to be when our cities are flooding and there's not enough crops being
grown anymore. Yeah, this was not a good dress rehearsal. Yeah, I hear you on that. So if it
were possible and fundable, and there was political will, if we truly cared about the
society of the future and what Palo Alto and San Francisco might look like in 2050 or any city
in the world, wouldn't it make sense to invest in third trimester security and oxytocin with groups
of happy people surrounding pregnant women so that they don't have stress? I don't know how
feasible it is, but would it pay dividends over decades if such a thing were pursued?
Actually, multiple lifetimes, which brings in this. Okay, so how did your brain construct
genes had something to do with it, but environment beginning and fuel life has something to do with?
What does that actually mean on a nuts and bolts level? Environmental stimuli starting from where
you were fetus to what you had for breakfast this morning will change which genes in your brain
are active and which are turned off. And in some cases, we'll turn some of them on permanently
and some of them off permanently. And then there's these amazing mechanisms, something that's called
non Mendelian inheritance of traits that because of something in the world you developed in,
you have a body with a certain physiological profile such that when you are pregnant,
you will pass on some of those traits to your fetus, not through genes, but because of the
hormonal environment that's been generated, things like that, where it will affect your
parenting style in a way that will produce a kid who as an adult will be just like you.
Some of these things are multi-generational. Now, amid that, you've got this like
narrow line to the sort of tread there, which an awful lot of like social progressives have to do,
which is, wow, adversity, societal adversity, social adversity, all of that is so, so bad for you
that could actually have multi-generational consequences. Wow, that's really bad. That's
really bad. But where the temptation then is to say, and these are such strong effects, there's
nothing we could do about it. The other side of it is there's very little of that biology
that winds up being written in stone. Interventions at every point in life
can undo some of those things. It's this whole like trendy sexy field called neuroplasticity.
You make the environments of 90-year-olds more sensorially stimulating and at postmortem,
they were making neuronal connections in the park. So, wow, bad stuff leaves long,
long scar tissue, but it's reversible. How do you reconcile these two that seemingly
are contradictory? Yeah, bad stuff leaves consequences for a long time afterward,
and the longer you wait to try to reverse it, to try to counter it, the more of an uphill
battle it's going to be. You want to fix somebody who has been mired in the neurodevelopmental
consequences of poverty. Do something about it when they're four years old, not when they're
applying to college. Thank you for all that. Let's move on to your new book, Determined,
A Science of Life Without Free Will, which is, as I looked this morning, is available for pre-order
on Amazon and elsewhere. Can you give an overview of the main thesis and maybe in there, please
start by defining what you mean by free will. Okay. I published this book about five years ago
called Behave, The Biology of Humans at Their Best and Worst, and it was like the original
draft was a thousand pages, and my publisher had a panic attack, and it was eventually merely an
impossible 700 pages. It was, how do you understand where social behavior comes from? Yeah, it was
caused by neurons one second ago, but it was also caused by whatever environmental stimuli in the
previous minute made those neurons do that, and it was also caused by your hormone levels this
morning that made this or that part of the brain more or less sensitive to these stimuli, and it
has to do with trauma or stimulation in the last year, and it's got to do with adolescence and
fetal life, and your genes interacting with all of that, and what's most like charming to me. It
also has something to do with what kind of culture your ancestors invented 400 years ago, because
that's going to have affected how your mother was mothering you within minutes of birth, cultural
differences with that, and thereafter. So everything from like, was there a good or bad smell in the
room just now, affects people's opinions about social politics to where your ancestors dealing
with a high infectious disease load, and thus they were spooked by foreigners coming in, and that
influences cultural differences and xenophobia today. All of that stuff matters, so you know,
I'd stand up in front of like a bunch of people and go on about this for 60 minutes, and at the
end, the ones who were like still standing, inevitably someone would say, whoa, you know,
this seems to kind of challenge the notion of free will, and like my immediate response was,
yeah, you think, you know, I haven't believed in free will since I was 13 or so, but it was
a little bit of a revelation of, okay, I got to like do son of that previous book and make
explicit, when you put all these pieces together, there is no room for free will whatsoever, we are
nothing more or less than the biology, which brought us to this moment over which we had no
control, and its interactions with environment that brought us to this moment, which over which we
had no control. So the first half of the book is like trying to, in a less screechy way, like
convince somebody of that, and basically go after all of the contemporary compatibilist
arguments where you don't have to deal with like a medium of peasant, you can deal with someone
contemporary who says, yeah, atoms exist, and molecules exist, and neurons are for real, but
here is somehow how you still pull free will out of the rabbit's hat there of like taking on the
contemporary arguments for free will. The second half of the book is the one that's been much more
challenging to me since I was 13, which is, okay, okay, you convince me there's no free will, I give
up, okay. Oh my God, what if people actually started believing this? How are we supposed to
function? What's the world supposed to look like if we all accepted that there's no free will at all,
and what the second half of the book is about is like trying to wrestle with that, and the themes
over and over and there are number one, the roof isn't going to cave in, we're not going to have
like murderers running throughout the streets, because over and over we've been able to deal with
subtracting responsibility out of our understanding of where behavior comes from, and not only doesn't
the world run amuck at that point, it's become a more humane place. Wow, witches really don't
cause hailstorms, so that is one point. Another is this sort of knee jerk responsive, oh my God,
if it's deterministic world and there's no free will, does that mean nothing can change? No, it means
this is exactly how we change. Here's the biology of how you turn Nazis into ex-Nazis 40 years later
who were remorseful, all of that, and I guess the third final theme in there is if you look at this
and this is depressing as hell, oh my God, maybe my corner office and my corporation
and my sense of self-esteem that I've gotten from that wasn't earned because there's no free will
or whatever, what a bummer, maybe this leaves a big existential void, if that's your response to
there being no free will, you're one of the lucky ones. For most humans on earth, their experience
isn't being given credit for stuff that they really aren't worthy worthy of being credited for,
for most humans it's being blamed for stuff that was out of your control, and a world in which
people stop believing in free will is going to be a hell of a lot more humane. I have a lot of
questions, Robert. I sent a note around to my inner circle about a week ago in anticipation
and preparation for this interview, and the response on this topic was very polarizing. There
were some people who thought there were three responses in three groups. One group was like,
it doesn't matter, a book is, we've been having this discussion of free will for centuries,
a book isn't going to change that. There was another camp that said this is horribly dangerous
because it could lead to nihilism at a time when we need a pro-social response from more people.
And then another camp, which was actually the majority, including my girlfriend,
they felt liberated by it because it got them off the hook of things that had been bothering them
and their content in their own lives, so it made them, this is what I'm good at, this is what I'm
doing. So it was really fascinating, three categories of response, and these are largely
intellectual, well-read people that I shared it with. But before I ask you further questions,
could you just define what you mean by free will? Is it a binary thing, yes or no, or is it a spectrum
or a continuum? Yeah, and this part of the debate itself, and apropos of that, and you're
canvassing people, it's interesting that you didn't get, in fact, the most common response,
including people who think about this a lot, including people who make a profession think
about this a lot, saying, yeah, yeah, yeah, this is how the brain works, this is how genes work,
this is how, but somehow, I still believe in free will and it's still there, which is very
different from your people who said, oh my god, nihilism, the people who say, well, even if there
isn't free will, we probably shouldn't tell people that because things are going to go crazy after
that. Most people somehow are, the term is, compatibilists, they're able to believe in
things like 21st century technology and science and stuff, but somehow, there's still a way of
getting free will out of there, and that's 90 to 95% of contemporary philosophers.
It's almost like a religion then, like, I'm not going to die, climate change isn't going to be
a disaster because the truth is so painful that you don't, it's like cognitive dissonance of sorts.
Yeah, and of course, the most interesting ones are these super smart philosophers who go on
and on in books that I can't understand about how, yes, yes, yes, I'm willing to admit, I believe
this is a physical universe, but here's where we get free will from, and when you really, really
look at what they're saying, and when you look at their like YouTube lectures and you look at
where their faces get sort of wincy and pain-looking and stuff, most of the time what they're saying
is, please, let's pretend there's free will, because damn, this is going to be scary if there
isn't, which puts you, you know, one of those circles of your friends. Okay, so what do I
mean by free will? People who get gummed up with free will stuff in the legal realm, it's always
stuff like, did you know you had options to behave differently? Were you aware of what the
consequences would be of the option you did choose? That's all the stuff about intent,
and that's completely boring to me. Then there's a whole school of people neurobiologists who
think about free will, and what they say is something that's sort of like the cousin of,
like the legal approach, which is when you first become aware that you intend to do something,
is it possible to show that your brain already decided to do that? Is the awareness, is your
sense of intent just a total red herring? And in fact, your brain decided before you think
you're decided, whoa, there's no free will. And this was from some landmark experiments in the
1980s, and people have been fighting about the interpretation of that ever since. And, you know,
it's not clear, and it totally bores me also, because both the legal realm and the, ooh,
when do you become aware of intent? And is that different from when you become aware of being
aware of intent? And here we're going to fight that for the next 10 years between the neuroscientists
and the philosophers. None of those people and none of the legal people ask, where did that
intent come from in the first place? And that's where things fall apart, because the intent came
from what those neurons were doing a second ago, and what the hormones were doing this morning,
and what your fetal life and genes and culture and all of that. And when you look closely at that,
there isn't a crack in that edifice of biology, interacting environment from what your ancestors
were up to, to what happened a millisecond ago. There isn't a crack in there in which you can
shoehorn in this non-biological notion that there's free will.
So one of my coaches has been talking to me about meditation and other things,
and shares this famous quote from Victor Frankel, between stimulus and response,
there is a space. In that space is our power to choose our response. In our response lies our
growth and our freedom. And I've always loved this quote. But in light of your recent book,
what are your thoughts on that quote? It's beautiful. It's clearly what was needed to sustain
people who survived concentration camps, and Victor Frankel was one of them,
but he understood the reality of it. People who became depressed and gave up and concentration
camps died. People who were able to quote, choose to hold on to what mattered to them, and you know,
there are sense of self-worth and whatever, and had these amazing abilities to resist during this
hellhole. They only survived if they had all those admirable traits, plus a hell of a lot of luck,
because if you didn't have that luck, if your number came up today, it didn't matter how,
you know, optimistic your basic temperament was. So he was taking basically the lesson that got
him through that, and it's incredibly powerful. Nonetheless, that's not how the biology of it
works. You look at somebody in a concentration camp who sunk into depression, and they were dead
two months later, even before starvation was enough to explain it. And you look at someone
like Victor Frankel, who was able to find meaning in life, which plus a hell of a lot of luck,
got him out the other end. And it's not by chance that those two people differed.
But maybe it's the belief in free will, in this case, was more important than actual free will.
Absolutely. On the other hand, if you believe you were responsible for the fact that you
haven't become rich, just because you happened to have been born poor, that's not a very good
recipe for coming out the other end, feeling good about yourself. Okay, here's a great example of
this. Like one of the stupidest ways in which we could think about, ooh, biology affects our
perceptions of us, like the shape of your skull, the shape of your skull, how symmetrical it is,
whether the zygomatic arches underneath your eyes that make your cheekbones are of a particular
shape or, you know, yeah, it's got nothing to do with free will. It's got to do, we know, bone,
morphogenic proteins and all of that. And it just so happens that in one realm,
if you luck out and you have one of these nice symmetrical faces that counts as more attractive,
people like you more. They treat you better. They unconsciously are more cooperative with you.
They're more likely to vote for you. So you get somebody who like is sitting in the corner office
and part of it is that they've got magnificent cheekbones and, whoa, there's no free will. Maybe
you shouldn't feel quite so proud of all your accomplishments because your cheekbones are just
the first of the zoolian things that you didn't control. But then in another setting, if you're
sitting in a defendancy in a courtroom and you happen to have those cheekbones that are not of
the beautiful type, you're more likely to get convicted. The attractiveness of a defendant
influences for the same exact circumstances with mock turies and experiments, the likelihood of
getting convicted. People who are more attractive, African American men who have less aphro stereotypical
features to their face are less likely to get convicted. That's not stop feeling so good about
yourself about your corner office that you were more likely to get sent to jail because of this
like dumbass business about the symmetry of your skull. What kind of world is this?
What does 18 to 20 year old listening to this podcast who does not have a symmetrical face
to make of what you just said? It sucks. It sucks because this is a very deeply ingrained
you know, primates and other animals like more attractive organisms, fruit flies,
like more symmetrical ones. And symmetrical here is just like the tip of the iceberg of all the
versions of good biological luck. It sucks. Amid that, the notion that there is an average, that
there is a norm out there. This is what a normal person is supposed to look like. This is a normal
height. This is a normal degree of extroversion. This is a normal degree of beauty. This is a
normal. Normal is an emergent artifact. There is no normal. There is no human who is normal. And
normal is an artifact that every one of those traits just to get all like chaos theory stuff
is a strange attractor. Nobody is normal. What we call normal is people whose collections of traits
are statistically closest to what we've decided counts as desirable and healthy.
There's no normal out there that you're failing to live up to.
Is there something interesting on the other side of this that someone listening to this or even
myself, when I hear you don't have free will, I'm like, hell yeah, I do. I'm going to show you.
And it actually becomes a flipping moment where it may not actually be free will, but it may become
dedication or motivation that was nationed within them towards some life of purpose or something
different that was triggered by someone telling them they didn't have free will. What do you think
about that? Yeah, here's a scenario I've experienced. Like I can almost see it coming
and I'm like not trying to sound snarky here, but like it's kind of like this. I'm sitting there. I
have office hours. Two students are there taking my class and they're saying, I don't know about
this free will stuff. But you know, what about I feel like I'm having free will and I'm saying
there's no free will. And here's the biological explanation for what you just brought up. And
at an incredibly high rate over my like 40 years of doing this, at some point, one of the students
is going to lean forward, pick up a pen and say, I just decided to pick up that pen. Are you telling
me I had no free will on this? And over these years, asking the question, which of those two
students are going to do that? And I will bet you I have about 85 90% predictability. If I know
one of them is male, one of them is female. I'm betting it's more likely to be the male.
One of them is male, who is heterosexual and the female is attractive. I'm betting it's more
likely to be the male. One of them is first generation from an immigrant group that came here
as refugees. They're less likely to challenge me. One of them hates their father and I keep
reminding them of that. They're more likely to challenge me. One of them had higher testosterone
levels this morning. They're the one who's more likely to challenge. One of them has more self
esteem problems. And the one time they stood up to a bully in middle school, they got a sense of
self esteem from that they're more likely to give me all tell me how their frontal cortex is wired.
Tell me what their fetal life was like. Tell me what culture. Tell me if their fourth generation
going to my like elite school or if they got into the first generation, fourth generation,
they're much more likely to want to take on some like dead white males sitting there. First generation,
they're more likely to feel grateful or intimidated about challenging. Like throw all those variables
together. And I got like 90% predictability with that. And that's because where did that intent
to pick up that pen just come from? Where did that intent and the other person did not pick
up the pen where it came from? It came from one second before and a decade before and a thousand
years before and all of that. Wow. I was about to tell you something that happened to me this
morning. But but then you're going to psychoanalyze me. But on the days of our podcast, I go for a
long bike ride because it oxygenates me and I came back and I was craving like protein,
an omelet with cheese. And I was opening the fridge. And I just, it wasn't like I'm going to show
Robert, it was unbidden to me. And I said, you know what, I'm not going to have an omelet. I'm
going to have an oatmeal. So I didn't want oatmeal, but I just approved myself. It's a tiny little
trivial example. But is that free will that in the moment I changed what I wanted to do,
but kind of because I wanted to prove you wrong a little bit or what's going on there?
No, of course not. There was no free will there at all. Like if you, okay, as a canonical example,
if you grow up thinking your parents are the greatest and as an adult, you wind up exactly
like them, you didn't choose to be that way. If you grow up and circumstances has caused you to
hate and despise your parents and as an adult, you make sure you do exactly the opposite of them
in every single possible domain, you're just as determined. You're just as there's no more free
will in that case than the other. Or if you've decided you love some of these attributes of them
and hate others, so you're a hybrid of them. Okay, so you this morning after the bike ride looking
in there. So first thing, where'd your self reflection come from? You didn't choose to be
someone capable of like emotionally intelligent self reflection and examination of your motives
and behaviors. Next, where did your sense of like to the extent that I represent any sort of like
neurobiological authority, where did your sense of like occasionally challenging their bullshit
come from? You're higher up on the baboon hierarchy than me. Well, in talking about how
neurons work, I definitely am. In navigating the social world, my guess is I'm definitely not, but
where did where did you become the sort of person who would want to say some version of
I'm going to show them? Where did you become somebody who would have critical thinking and
enough respect for critical thinking to think critically and say this maybe constitutes a
refutation of this stance where that didn't come from nowhere. If you had grown up marinating an
alcohol from your mom when you were a fetus, you wouldn't have been capable of that critical
self reflection. If you had grown up in a culture where they said what you were told is true and
do not challenge authority, or if you were thrown growing up in a culture where you're like ethos is
anything the man says is bullshit and you should challenge it, you didn't choose which of those
cultures and every one of those steps along the way, nor did you choose the neurochemical
makeup of the part of your brain that does starch craving versus protein craving. And depending on
how those two places were wired through no credit to you, it would have something to do with how
readily you could think about this intellectual thought experiment of taking on this stance
that there's no free will and showing that it's not really the case here by foregoing
starch instead of protein. Maybe in some other case you're the reinforcement you would get from
one of those was so powerful that you would do the I'm going to show him in some other setting.
You're going to wait for the next elevator instead of cramming in there. You see I chose to do that
because you happen to have a brain this wired for really, really liking like starch after a bike
ride. So that's not where you would have done that experiment. Every one of those steps, none of that
was free. So actually that brings up another kind of profound insight while you were speaking and I
don't I don't want to make all these examples about me. But when we're talking about free will,
I only know my own brain. So I worked on Wall Street, I was a teacher and then all of a sudden
I've got this podcast and it's becoming more popular. I'm getting emails from around the world.
I'm getting traction with people in government, with universities and it feels like my life is no
longer my own. And listening to you speaking, it makes me even more have a fiduciary responsibility
to these times and to help midwife society through to a softer landing than the defaults.
And you talking about that we don't free have free will actually makes me feel more
of of that drive and and that, you know, acting as a golden retriever,
Overton Windows sort of a vector in these conversations. What's going on there as I'm
feeling that? Well, once again, you're proving there's no free will because
lots of other people at your juncture would decide it's hopeless. And instead, you take this
information and you've turned it into some sort of moral imperative to try to like make the world
whole. That doesn't happen by chance. That's not random who's capable of doing that. Lots of people
who find out about this like collapse into like self interest or a nihilistic nothingness or
sure. Where did that response come from? That's an incredibly healthy response, especially for
all the people in the world around you. That's a great way as and that didn't come from out of
nowhere. Nothing comes from nothing. But like your dad had 14% of the architects had learned
from him, cultural evolution can happen that way, irrespective of whether there is free will or not.
Of course, but whether culture evolves isn't dependent on whether or not there's free will.
I don't think there is free will. Cultural phenomenon could be explained with the same
biology interacting with environment, blah, blah, blah, that I've been spouting.
Cultural evolution could be explained by the myth of free will as well. It's in some ways
a separate topic until you start getting into what were the nuts and bolts about how the culture
just evolved. What about free won't? About 10 years ago, I like you love dogs and I realized
that pigs were smarter than dogs or as smart. One of my favorite things to eat was bacon,
lettuce and tomato sandwiches. My girlfriend didn't eat meat and I'm giving up pork,
but it was very difficult. I created this image in my head of trucks on the highway that had pigs
in them, but instead they were dogs. I had this visceral negative response to any menu with pork
on it and I haven't had pork in 10 years. That's not free will, but I call it free won't. I decided
something that was ethically important to me and I created a way for my neocortex to
trump my limbic system in the moment. How do you explain that?
It's a little bit of a semantic issue as to what counts as free will versus free won't.
Your experience can be an example of free won't. I'm not going to eat pig anymore,
or it could be an example of free will. I'm going to stick to a moral stance of mine,
so it's a little bit semantic. Insofar as it's semantic, it's the same answer.
Where'd that free won't come from in you? First off, where'd your knowledge of what gets done
to pigs? Where did your love of dogs come from? Where did your capacity to generalize empathy
from dogs to pigs? Where did your knowledge of pig intelligence come from? Where did your frontal
cortex get the means for you to look at the bacon lettuce tomato sandwich on the menu,
and somehow to suppress the associated cravings and instead pull up an image of terrified dogs
in a transport truck? Your mother did something right by you that you have a frontal cortex that
was capable of regulating impulsive cravings to that extent, because that got constructed at you
at some point. Your brain is of a type where whatever rewards bacon gives to your the correct
neurons in there, it's not so powerful that it overwhelms your capacity for, you know,
emotional regulation, and it's quite possible that you have lurking in there a craving for
something else that you wouldn't be able to override. You have not because you lack
self-confidence, self-discipline there, but because, oh, you're wiring, you know, Ben and Jerry's
ice cream sets off neurons that will not be said no to, but bacon didn't once you set your conscious
frontal cortex to it sufficiently. So if there is free will, would it reside in the
frontal cortex? Well, again, not to sound snarky, but that's a hard one for me to answer, because
that's, in a sense, asking me if the tooth fairy existed, which much neurons would
let me rephrase the question. Let me rephrase the question. So in the Amazon bio for determined,
they write that Sapolsky mounts a full frontal assault on the pleasant fantasy that there is
some separate self telling our biology what to do, but couldn't biology itself in our ancestral
environment created via evolution and adaptation such a separate self from novel historical
circumstances that that is the part of a body that exerts control in certain situations in my
situation to decide not to eat pork? Well, yes and no. This puts us into sort of your area of
like thinking about emergence. This is totally cool phenomenon. One of the like most interesting
things about neuroscience is you take a neuron from a fruit fly and you take a neuron from us
and they're the same thing. They're the same cell. They use the same neurotransmitters, the same wiring.
We did not become human because we invented new parts of the brain or new types of neurotransmitters.
What happened instead is one of those more is different scenarios of we've got 100 million
neurons for every neuron that a fly has and you put that many of them together and unexpected
complicated adaptive totally beautiful stuff emerges and the interesting stuff in our brains
are a merchant phenomenon like you give a chimp as many neurons as us and it would come up with
theology. It would come up with a totally different theology and it would come up with aesthetics and
would come up with okay so why isn't free will just an emergent phenomenon? The belief in free will,
the invention of the notion, the emotional connectedness to it and dependence upon the notion
is certainly emergent but free will is not because neurons don't work that way.
Okay what do I mean by that? The coolest thing about emergence is you take an ant
and it's making no sense at all and you put 10 ants and they're just doing random incoherent
stuff and you put 10,000 of them and they build a whole society and it's not because
when you get 10,000 of them suddenly the ants understand geometry or something. They know
exactly the same simple stupid few local neighbor interaction rules that they did when there was
just three of them but when you put enough of them together out pops this and all of the models
for how free will can be an emergent property requires you to break that rule and instead allow
that once you get enough ants together all of the ants can speak French and once you get neurons
together all of them could work in ways that the physical universe doesn't allow. The coolest thing
about like emergence is you look at our brains inventing stuff and we're made out of the same
cells as Drosophila brains are and they're still doing the same stupid things. The amazingness is
what is like totally provincial three or four local neighbor rules and suddenly you throw enough
of them together and they're still just as simple. That's the thing that makes me like almost want
to weep at how cool emergence is and it explains so many things out there but any model in which
you have to speculate that the emergent meta-level property now suddenly gets the ability to reach
down to the micro level of the constituent parts and make them work differently in much cooler
ways it can't work that way and every version of free will coming out of an emergence requires that.
So my work and you watched my movie recently looks at the emergent constraints of the macro
human economy the eight billion ants eight billion humans that no one is in control and that society
at least for now is this functioning as an energy hungry super organism but your recent work suggests
the same is happening at the micro level in an individual brain of sorts so am I correct in saying
that biology constrains both our micro and our macro systems but it doesn't determine it what do
you think about that? Well of course I'm going to disagree because I don't think it just constrains
when you look at all of the biological influences from the second ago to a million years ago and
you look at all the ways that biology interacts with environment not only isn't it constraining
or facilitating that's all there is that is what's there that is who we are that is
how we arrived at being who we are at this moment there's nothing but that but you bring up
in your bringing up the micro level stuff one of the like inevitable things that people get
pulled to at this point which is oh a deterministic universe and deterministic interactions of
deterministic biology and interactive ways with deterministic environment blah blah blah etc
what about quantum indeterminacy and what's that because you that you get down at a sufficiently
micro subatomic level and events right now were not caused by the events that just came before that
there is complete unpredictable randomness about how subatomic particles work and people
still like are boggled by it and don't fully understand it and there's still like a counter
revolutionary old guard of physicists who say there's got to be actually a deterministic thing
lurking in there someplace but on a very very subatomic level things appear not to be deterministic
and are totally random and thus what do you know there's a whole school of philosophers who say
free will comes out of quantum indeterminism and that doesn't make any sense either so let me go
down a little bit of an academic rabbit hole here my phd advisor who's since passed away
trials good night was an evolutionary biologist who focused on multi-level selection the fact
that it wasn't just selfishness but it was the individual competitiveness with group behavior
with maybe some bacteria or things in your gut that our selection was happened at multiple
different levels and he called that contextual analysis so with respect to free will doesn't
it depend on multiple scales and dimensions like what's happened to an organism's life
we say organisms have will which might also describe as desire or preference so an organism
feels hunger okay so it seeks food finds it eats is satisfied then other drivers come kick in after
it's satisfied it has defense or shelter or to go to the bathroom or to mate so these are all
genetic programs with chemical rewards but what about this case the organism feels hunger
but because of the complexity of its emotions its life the society um it considers whether or not
to act on that feeling and especially if it's a human organism such a complex animal with
hundreds of millions of neurons it might weigh or defer or change the paths because of these other
contexts in its life so how does context fit in with free will especially with human animals
it's beautiful it's incredibly important and I have I have such respect for multi-level
selection people just because they were like out crying of the wilderness for such a long time
people like David Sloan Wilson and he's been on my podcast yeah okay he's great and he was like
pariah for yeah like until uh not in an active kin selection but David Sloan Wilson and EO
Wilson decided that they actually agreed on more things than they disagreed about and it was like
totally beautiful and the resolution was context in some settings this is the most appropriate
level of analysis at the level of groups in some settings it's you know genomic non-expressed DNA
and you're looking at selfish DNA at sometimes just the whole genome is sometimes and yeah it's
context dependent and context is like the most interesting thing about us because like this
was my last book was all about this uh you know the biology of our best behaviors and our worst
behaviors what's most interesting about it is you could have the exact same behavior the same
neurons telling the same muscles do the same exact thing and depending on the context you could just
be ethnically cleansing a village or you could be Mother Teresa in one setting pulling a trigger
is like self-sacrificial and amazing and in another it's like one of the most heartless things to do
like the motoric aspects of the behavior we carry out yeah that's kind of interesting
to learn the biology that there's nowhere near as interesting as what it means in that context
and that's exactly what all of this is about so your dog just shook his head and I heard the chain
and the chain reminded me that you have a golden retriever in your office and that made me happy
and it made me more positive and maybe that changed the framing of my next question so that's also
context or is that totally unrelated to free will okay so that's context that that's that's
one of the sets of webs which went all wound together and in that case context was about
five minutes long knowing I had a golden but also 30 years long since you were growing up with
goldens and 40 000 years long since you were of a culture that like likes dogs instead of eating
them all of that but yeah that's exactly where that came from so how do you define Robert the
difference between free will and agency do you feel any sort of agency in your life and how do you
still feel a drive to contribute to good in the world if you don't see us as as having free will
well this is where like there's no such thing as free will there's no such thing as agency
a criminal justice system that uses the notion of responsibility and blame and punish punishment
makes no sense whatsoever at the same time a meritocracy that runs on notions of praise and
reward makes just as little sense none of it makes any sense and someone like telling you you did
something rotten ultimately if you really really believe it makes as little sense as saying that
earthquake did something rotten and someone telling you just did something great and what a good job
makes as little sense is telling a flower that's a great like odor that do you release a fragrance
or whatever like that's the reality how in hell do you function that way how do i function that way
i function that way about one tenth of one percent of the time where i truly truly am able to think
i don't deserve anything i am not entitled to anything i have earned nothing where i truly
can think hating somebody makes as little sense as hating an earthquake yeah i could pull that
off for about three and a half seconds at a time before i fall into my lifetime of cultural training
um or framed a different way one tenth of one percent of the time i can actually function
in a way that i think is the only morally acceptable way for us to function in other words it's not
easy and like we all got a long way to go with it but at least start trying to think that way in
the domains that really matter uh when you're deciding like who gets a life sentence without
parole or when you're deciding who gets a corporate salary that's a hundred times higher than the
people working in the warehouse and like if you don't want to have to try to figure out why that
explains why you like uh you know bacon constitutively more than you like ben and jerry's that's fine
you know leave the science alone for that just go with your instincts that there's agency there
but when it comes to the big stuff if we can only pull it off some of the time that's where we have
the moral obligation to do that so what are the societal i mean you've spent years presumably
writing this book and you said that you've been since you were 13 you believe this way
so you've obviously thought about the implications of this could we use the the scientific uh
foundations that you outline and determined uh to influence the behavior or the policies the
institutions of our world in a positive way well i guess at this point am i going to sound like an
npr tote bag toting liberal or am i going to sound like someone who's much more left in my extreme
or am i going to sound someone who's so far out like i'm not even in the same playing field in
terms of lunatic fringe the only it puts you at the lunatic fringe somebody tells you nice cheek
bones and that makes this little sense to feel good afterward as somebody telling you have a good
moral philosophy and you have just used that to make a million lives better and thank you for being
that person that makes this little none of it makes any sense if you really really follow this stuff out
and the cheekbone end it doesn't really matter but getting people to think more correctly about
punishment and reward and who deserves anything um and whether hate ever makes sense at all
that's where it has some major societal consequences i mean just you know as one example of that
we understand how epilepsy works to some degree there was a time when people didn't and if somebody
had an epileptic seizure what they did to you in their 15th century village was burn you at the
stake because you were demonically possessed whoa understanding how this stuff works has societal
implications that's thousands of people who were burned at the stake understanding that schizophrenia
isn't caused by crappy psychodynamically hostile mothering and instead a neurogenetic disorder
whoa that makes a big difference in how the world works and in every one of these cases
it makes for a more humane world it's like really good that we don't burn people with
epilepsy at the stakes or tell mothers of teenagers who've just been diagnosed with schizophrenia
some Freudian bile that you caused it because unconsciously you hate your child like it's a
better world at each one of these steps so what what is the difference between a deterministic
world which you are describing and a fatalistic or nihilistic mindset or worldview great um
the fatalistic one is the worst place you could arrive from all of this stuff which is to look at
all of these biological threads around our fingers and all of these environmental and all
these biology environment interaction threads and and collectively they're much more than threads
they're a gigantic cocoon blah blah blah to conclude nothing can change so why bother
what you proved is something can change you don't eat bacon anymore um it's not really
because you chose to no longer eat bacon it's because you were you were changed previously
in life in ways that made it possible for you to learn about pig intelligence and to evoke
images of puppies and trucks we don't change we don't choose to change but we sure are changed
and we have to make use of our knowledge about how that change comes about because if we don't
think the change happens we're totally screwed nihilism is not like a very happy picture for how
we should go about looking at what else there is out there so this is really a huge call to
changing our cultural environment but really to education um and many other things because
humans can change but only if our two seconds ago one month ago five years ago 40 years ago
and we can't change the 40 years ago or the 400 years ago but we can change our cultural stimuli
at least in theory right so education and and moving in the direction of some of these pro-social
outcomes will be able to change other people and empower them to do the environmental equivalent
of giving up pork or whatever it is absolutely so you get somebody who because of environmental
events learns that something crummy is going on in Ukraine and they say wow I'm going to educate
myself about the history of like Slavic you know tribalism or whatever and they come out the other
end and tell people you know any of this Putin saying this is about NATO this is about this is
nonsense in the 19th century the Russians were saying the Ukrainians couldn't use their own
language this is centuries old what have you just done there you have been exposed to environmental
stimuli telling you that something's going on in Ukraine and you decide I'm going to learn
more about it how do you turn into the sort of person who at that juncture would say I'm even
interested in the news I want to learn more about it I'm going to use my critical thinking to see
maybe one of the stories being spouted here isn't actually all that accurate who taught you
challenge stuff like that who taught you to read who to blah blah all the ways in which you could
have been a different person in no ways that you can control and once that brought about a change in
you whoa this has nothing to do with NATO this has to do with different Slavic tribes hating
each other for half a millennium then you're capable of telling that to somebody else and
perhaps they're in a position to be changed by that as a result like on the most basic like
concrete are you kidding me you know yeah actually the world needs to work this way
if you've been listening to this podcast and you've decided this is incredibly galvanizing to you
or if you've decided this is totally wrong or if you've decided this is boring or if you've
decided you really want to get like a cookie your brain is structurally different than it was two
seconds ago because it has to be that's how it works if what you've concluded is this is boring
I'm going to get a cookie your brain has probably changed in a way that's not going to have a whole
lot of long-term consequences but somewhere in there there are three and a half synapses
that are now working differently than they were working 10 minutes ago they may no longer be
working differently 10 minutes from now it's a very transient effect or if this decides
makes you decide you're going to go out and become like a Baptist preacher or something
that change persisted but everything something just changed in your brain in a way that is
ultimately only explainable by the physical universe and thus like you go get a cookie
or thus you go devote the rest of your life to a different cause than you would have 10 minutes ago
because that's all there is there's nothing more than that in anything more you would invoke to
explain that you're invoking magic that defies how the physical universe works and how emergent
systems work and whether or not quantum indeterminacy has anything to do with what
you order on the menu it simply doesn't work that way why did you write this book it wasn't free
will you had to have an idea in your mind other than getting the science right you've been a
lifelong scholar of the human and and primate brain but what was your hope in in writing this book
um well everything ranging from
to make this a more human humane world to showing those asshole bullies when I was 14
year old in junior high and they were bullying me look what I've done to making money to having
people think I'm a kind person to having people think I have nice cheekbones because they're
confusing writing a good book with all sorts of other things that have nothing to do with it and
are not based in reality yeah all this stuff because my parents wanted me to be a doctor and
they went to their graves wanting me to be a doctor and I turned it to this instead yeah look at this
look at you see you see because they wanted me to be a critical thinker yeah look at this you see
so it had to come out this book had it was like you had to give birth to this book as a natural
continuum of your life's work yeah but in the exact same way but in a much less interesting
level that I forgot to bring the charger with me when I went from outside back to here
so I mean I love all of your books I've read about a third of this one because it's 500 pages
and 10s and I've been really busy but I can see this book striking a nerve especially with
what's going on in our social discourse today are you worried at all about the academic
public response to this book it could there be a similar drama like there was created by
Richard Dawkins's selfish gene in the 70s which was a naive interpretation of selfishness back
then but could there be a naive interpretation of the science that could rationalize apathy
and nihilism are you are you excited about that do you have some trepidation what are you what can
you share um and by the way characterizing that is naive with Dawkins is exactly one would get
from a card-carrying multi-level selectionist yeah I'm pretty pretty damn naive and uh and dogmatic
but but it but it did become popular and it was grabbed by people to rationalize look humans are
naturally this way which was an incorrect interpretation but are you worried that we might
get the same reaction with your book I don't have any free will that's what made me do it I wasn't my
fault um absolutely and some of that's exciting and some of that's terrifying because I'm just like
this torpy professor sitting someplace and if somebody decides um like maligning their religious
beliefs or at the other end of the spectrum if I'm maligning their social identity and their
validation of it or and they're gonna hate me that's gonna suck um I I have a bit of a conundrum
in that intellectually um very very combative and love it and interpersonally I am totally meek
and skittish so there's going to be an interesting balancing of those tendencies
depending on how much somebody hates my ideas versus if they wind up hating me I get it so
intellectually Robert how could you be wrong about this is there an experiment or something
that you could discover that would change your mind that humans have free will absolutely um
and conveniently it's an impossible experiment but what the hell um okay you've just done something
with like incredible consequence you've pulled a trigger as highly context-dependent like this
matters it makes a difference and it's possible to track down like the one little node of neurons
that told your muscle to do that so let's look at that node of neurons if you could show me
they would have done the exact same thing regardless of what any of the neighboring neurons
did in the previous seconds that's kind of interesting and impressive but then show me
that they would have done the exact same thing regardless of what you had for breakfast whether
you were tired scared stressed aroused whatever and then show me it would have done the same thing
no matter what your hormone levels were and show me they would have done the exact same thing
whether you grew up in an individualist or a collectivist culture and show me that if you
changed every gene inside those neurons into the set of genes that the person sitting next to you
had do all of those things and if those neurons still made you do the exact same thing you've
just proven free will go good luck yeah yeah i see um okay i i as i said i have hours of questions
for you but i want to be respectful of your time i have one more question related to your book
and your work and then and then we'll get to the closing questions that i ask all my guests so
what might be some some key components or even key questions uh in a new systems informed design
of society based on an understanding of neuroscience physiology and and no free will
um writ small a huge challenge for the field is we know a lot about how like a neuron works
or a little a little circuit of neurons and we know about like the kind of stuff that brains
produce like ideology or or love or things like that it's really tough the scaling up problem the
intermediate range is the big challenge um because traditionally you could look at the electrical
activity of three neurons at a time now these days you can canvas activity in 10 000 neurons
and look at their gene expression profiles and you get these massive bioinformatic data sets and
nobody is smart enough to be able to think in 11 dimensions at once so the connecting the two
levels okay so that's uh let's see i hope lots of grad students are able to do that in the centuries
to come um the much bigger to do is how do we get past this sense that uh judgment makes sense
and punishment makes sense and praise makes sense and that somebody really isn't responsible for the
most wondrous things you can imagine or the most damaging and how do you get past that fact
that in the right circumstances it feels really good to punish someone for righteous reasons
how are you going to do this but you know three four hundred years ago people managed to do that
in thinking about the biologically deterministic phenomenon of epilepsy and subtract satan out
of it and we've done it over and over again in all sorts of other realms this kid is having trouble
reading because of a biologically deterministic thing called dyslexia not because they're lazy
we've done it we've done it over and over we got to do it over and over again
i sometimes feel that we're in this like twilight zone movie and often in my lectures i say that
we've arrived at a species level conversation that we're the first generation of homo sapiens
to be able to not not necessarily that we are but we have the ability to figure out where we
came from how we got here what we're doing to each other to the planet what our biology is
what we actually need what our natural resource balance sheet is or that of the earth and it
feels like your story is a piece of this it's like looking in the mirror at homo sapiens and
looking all around us and are we gonna have enough time to integrate this stuff do you get that feeling
or how do you respond to what i just said absolutely uh as as a way of kind of summarizing everything
you preach about the clocks ticking and we got a lot of stuff to overcome and a lot of
it taps into this sort of frame from my view of the world what is the universe of circumstance
that has made us into a species that's insatiable why was something wonderful yesterday not enough
tomorrow why are there a few exceptions to that why are there some people who didn't turn out that
way how can we you know opportunize knowledge about that to get to save the world in time
whereas your level of solving the same problem is uh hey you know oil reserves are not going to
last forever this is an anomaly you know there's all these different levels of attacking the same
problem uh the clock is ticking we're running out of all sorts of important stuff and it's very
much in our nature to be awful to have knots when times get bad and like go for it there's no
shortage of approaches that are desperately needed to try to fix some of this stuff what what would
you like the viewers and listeners of this podcast to take away from this brief overview
a little bit of your earlier work but primarily your new book determined a science of life without
free will well how how would you like people to to take this subject on after hearing this
this isn't scary because oh my god science i hated ninth grade biology this isn't scary
because the concepts are like inaccessible this isn't scary because it means there's no purpose
in life anything but that this isn't scary because it means we're all going to run amuck
the world's going to become more humane um and this isn't scary because if you're one of the
lucky ones it's going to make you feel like you don't deserve all the great things you've gotten
you don't deserve the great things you've gotten but for most people on earth what they're going to
find out is they don't deserve to have not gotten most of the great things they were deprived so this
is a wonderful thing so this is not oh my god this is like the roof isn't going to cave in
it's going to be better afterward inter individually and on a societal level if we understand like
where we're coming from and where we're coming from is it doesn't make sense to feel like you are
entitled to be treated better than another human and it doesn't make sense to think that there's
something like evil in looking at the damaging things that this collection of atoms we call humans
are doing versus damaging things that other collections of atoms are doing like this can
only be good things and again i could manage to think this way like one percent of the time
so nobody is saying this is going to be easy but like we got to try so broader than that
not on the topic of free will but you've thought about the human condition and and have a career
choice on human behavioral biology do you have any personal advice to the viewers of this show at
this time of global inequality and anxiety and crazy politics and climate change and and other
things what some people would call the the poly crisis do you have any recommendations to to people
all i can say is it takes a hell of a lot of work not to sink into
a depression and a sense of helplessness and my basic nature is such that i do that with a second's
notice um you're not alone things can change big potentially revolutionary things could emerge
from a lot of little component parts uh coming together uh empathy goes a hell of a long way
especially when it's empathy for someone where the empathy doesn't come naturally
and if you want to be a primate and decrease your stress hormone levels it's great if people
treat you nicely and groom you but it turns out it's even better if you groom them instead
and you know maybe all these pieces together you know keeps keeps the clouds away for a few
more seconds at a time and you know take advantage of those few seconds and be proactive so you've
been teaching for 40 years or so um what recommendations do you give to your 18 to 20
year old young humans that take your class at at the end after learning about this and after also
living in a time of of environmental damage and social stress etc or do you not give them advice
at all oh i i pontificate out the wazoo i'm i'm insufferable um and most of them appropriately
glaze over at that point um what what would i tell them what do i tell them um
it looks really tough to make a change but by definition because of my privilege in life
i've wound up spending my career interacting with students who are uber privileged um so if
anyone's going to do it it's you guys yeah because not only did you get to go to one of the best
universities on earth you almost certainly don't have horrible gut parasites because you're one of
the lucky ones um maybe the next thing is this thing that fascinates me trying to make sense of
in terms of like making the world whole and one of the completely irrational things we're
capable of doing as humans and have to do the more hopeless the process the problem seems
the more you have to decide that you're one of the ones who can solve the problem
which is a version of this impossible religious stance of the less lovable the person the more
you have to find the means to love them uh you're one of the lucky ones go and do it and keep in
mind it's not going to come cheap and you're going to have to make a lot of personal choices as to
what you're willing to give up along the way uh no one said this is going to be easy
that's kind of the underlying feeling that i'm getting from this great conversation
irrespective of whether i fully buy that there's no free will or not listening to you i feel that
i am one of the lucky ones and i have to do more than i have been doing to pass the baton or at
least you know accelerate this so that's the emotion that i'm feeling listening to you on this topic
but of course i can only understand my own mind i don't understand anyone else's and to incorporate
something i have to tell myself 99 percent of the time which is when you lapse and you fail to be
that wonderful you're no less a biological machine yeah that's we're we're dealing with some tough
things here and so we have to be kind to ourselves yeah and it's like a little bit self-serving to do
that almost fatuous you have to love yourself before you can love others but it helps yeah i've
i'm told that often what do you care most about in the world robert
um the scientist in me says being able to sit quietly and see how pieces of things fit together
um the 60 something this says being able to sit quietly and see how pieces of things fit together
and there's less pain afterward yeah i hear you um if you could make i ask this of all my guests
if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision what is one
thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures um you know knowing that you're a scientist
and you don't believe in magic wands but just hypothetically well i'll take two since this is
like imaginary one is that we habituate to good stuff more slowly um we may not invent that many
the next big things but that's probably a good thing in the long run um and i guess the other is
to be able to understand all of the circumstances in which we lose empathy and to understand why it
is that it's so much easier to make a neutral somebody into a them than to make them into an us
let alone to make a them into an us because we can do it and there's circumstances that make it easier
to do um why does adversity bring out the worst and so many of us this has been a fantastic
conversation um another thought that came to my mind is 20 years ago when i started reading
your books and watching your lectures was it predetermined that i would do a podcast with
you in 2023 um i i so value your intellect and your heart um if you were to come back in the
future on this show um the free will book determined coming out soon aside what is one topic that you
were passionate about relevant to human futures that you'd be curious or willing to take a deep
dive with me on well one that is derivative of all of this and maybe it's because i can't think of
anything these days i can't think of which socks i'm putting on without thinking about this damn
book i've been obsessing over since i was 13 um but maybe on the level of
how do we remember that no matter what amid all of these explanations and stuff
uh we're biological machines who believe they can feel sad
and because of how the world works thus we actually are sad when that's happening
and we actually are feeling less pain when our machinist has led us to that we are biological
machines who could know our machinists but it doesn't take the the emotional implications of
it away in the slightest it doesn't make pleasure any less pleasurable unhappiness and it doesn't
make pain any less painful i'm going to think about that um thank you so much uh professor
sepalski for for your time today and for your your work and we will uh post a link to your book
online and let's you and i stay in touch good let's do that this was totally fun and
meeting a a distant cousin who not only likes multi-level selection but emergence so
well we're also distant cousins from when pro console came down from the tree 17 million years ago
that too all right sir if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great simplification
dot com for more information on future releases